Solomon had three horrible half brothers
—Amnon,
Adonijah, and Absalom.
They were a lot older than he was,
but Solomon didn’t try to imitate them.
And he didn’t allow himself to be stumbled
by their bad conduct, as if to say,
‘Well, if that’s the kind of people
they have around here,
I want nothing to do
with Jehovah’s Witnesses.’
No, Solomon followed his own path.
He developed a strong personal relationship
with Jehovah God.
And remember what the Bible says
about Solomon in the beginning?
Jehovah loved him.
Isn’t that nice?
Wouldn’t you love it
if that were said about you?
I would.
Jehovah loved Solomon,
and Jehovah blessed Solomon in many ways.
For example, while Solomon was faithful,
Israel was at peace.
In fact, Solomon said: “Jehovah my God
has given me rest [all around].
“There is no one opposing me
and nothing bad [is] happening.”
So it was only
after Solomon became unfaithful
that resisters were raised up in Israel.
Not only was Israel at peace
when Solomon was at peace with God,
but Israel was rich.
Solomon had no financial problems.
The Bible says that the silver
was as common as the stones.
But when Solomon started
drawing away from Jehovah,
Jehovah withdrew his blessing.
So that prosperity didn’t last
even during Solomon’s reign.
Insight  tells us
that there was a drain on Israel’s economy.
Solomon was still spending money
as if it were going out of style,
but he didn’t have the income
that he once had.
And so, even materially, Israel suffered.
And Rehoboam did not inherit
the wealth from Solomon
that Solomon had
had at the peak of his reign.
Now, as our comment points out,
for much of his reign,
Solomon did a lot of good things.
But is it possible
that right from the beginning,
as involved as Solomon
was in theocratic projects,
there was a little red flag
that something wasn’t quite right?
It’s possible.
Now, as our comment points out,
when Solomon became king,
he was a young man,
but he was a young married man.
In fact, when he became king,
Solomon had probably been married
for a couple of years already.
He had a little boy.
He was a daddy.
He had a little boy—one-year-old Rehoboam.
But who was his wife
—probably his first wife?
She was an Ammonitess.
Ammonitess—what do we remember
about “Ammonitess”?
Oh, yes, Deuteronomy chapter 23
and verse 3.
Now, remember, when Solomon gets married,
King David is still alive.
David is probably at the wedding.
Now, here’s what Deuteronomy 23:3 says:
“No Ammonite
“or Moabite may come
into the congregation of Jehovah.
“Even to the tenth generation,
“none of their descendants
may ever come
into the congregation of Jehovah.”
What part of “never”
did Solomon not understand?
And so could that mean
that even before he became king,
Solomon had a casual view
of Jehovah’s laws on marriage?
It’s possible.
Well, why do we say “possible”?
Well, without being dogmatic,
Insight  says that there may
have been exceptions for foreign women
like Ruth the Moabitess.
But Insight  also says
that Solomon’s Ammonite wife
possibly contributed to his apostasy.
In any event, why was the first wife
a foreign woman and an Ammonitess to boot?
Now, if Solomon
had married a nice Jewish girl
(just one)
and ‘rejoiced with the wife of his youth,’
don’t you think that the history of Israel
would have been much different?
I think it would have been.
Well, let’s take a moment to think
about the women Solomon did marry
—pagan women.
Now, you may have relatives
who are not in the truth;
you love your relatives,
and you go visit from time to time.
But how long is it before you
run out of things to talk about?
Because we just don’t have
the most important thing in common—the truth.
So we have to ask:
Why was Solomon so comfortable
with these pagan women?
What did he talk about?
Well, you can be sure he wasn’t studying
The Watchtower  with them.
But what was he doing?
What was the attraction
to these foreign women?
Was it their humility?
their modest dress?
their “chaste conduct”?
their “quiet and mild spirit”?
Or was it mainly physical?
Let’s be blunt.
Solomon was attracted
to the wrong kind of woman.
And there may have been early warning signs.
Speaking of “red flags,”
when Solomon began marrying many women,
did a prophet or a priest ever approach him
and give him some counsel?
Did they ever read Deuteronomy 17:17,
which applied directly to the king?
Deuteronomy 17:17
—it says about the king:
“Neither should he take
many wives for himself,
so that his heart may not go astray.”
Well, if he did receive that counsel,
he certainly didn’t apply it.
And if he didn’t receive that counsel,
we wonder, ‘Why not?’
Well, what’s the application?
Today, we may be very busy
in Jehovah’s organization,
but we have to be alert to any red flags
that despite outward appearances,
all is not well with us.
A single brother is a regular publisher.
He’s a regular meeting attender.
But on his nights off,
he likes to go to nightclubs,
and he’s comfortable in that atmosphere.
He isn’t shy about striking up conversations
with worldly people,
and he loves to dance.
Well, there are no sisters there,
so he dances with worldly women.
What’s the attraction?
He is busy in the congregation,
but there’s something there
that isn’t quite right.
A young pioneer brother loves to flirt.
Several young sisters think
he’s interested only in them.
The attention makes them feel special.
A ministerial servant
spends a lot of time
talking to a married woman.
When he was asked about it,
he justifies it and says: “We’re just friends.
We’re just talking.”
Famous last words.
A fine young sister is offended
when an older sister approaches her
and points out that her skirts and jeans
are too tight, too revealing.
Well, all of these are red flags.
We need to examine ourselves
from time to time to see whether,
no matter how many privileges we have,
something isn’t quite right.
When it comes to choosing a mate,
Solomon’s example can be instructive to us.
Now, what qualities
do we value in a marriage mate
—spiritual qualities?
Or is it merely the physical
and we hope that the spiritual
will catch up later?
A younger sister is getting acquainted
with a young brother.
He is really good looking
and has a great personality
and gets along with everybody.
But how is he doing spiritually?
Does he have a good schedule
for theocratic activities, and does he stick to it?
For example: If you mention an article
in a recent magazine,
does he often say,
“I must have missed that one”?
If that’s what happens, it’s a bad sign.
Does he make spiritual activities
a priority in his life?
If he doesn’t do that while he is single,
what makes you think that he’s going
to do it after you get married?
Will you change him, or will he change you?
As our comment reminds us,
Solomon enjoyed many privileges.
But he apparently felt that some of God’s laws
just didn’t apply to him.
Why not?
Well, we don’t know.
Could it be what Solomon
said in Ecclesiastes:
‘The king does whatever he wants’?
Maybe so.
Solomon multiplied horses
and acquired many wives for himself.
So, what’s the lesson for us?
No matter how long we’ve been in the truth,
no matter how many privileges we have,
no matter how much Jehovah has used us,
we can’t afford to let down our guard.
We must guard our heart,
and we mustn’t ignore any red flags
that might indicate that all is not well.